the Israeli military says Hamas has now
lost control of the north of Northern
Gaza after intense fighting 50,000
Palestinians fled Gaza City yesterday
through evacuation routes after Israel
opened a safe passage on the road to the
South for a few hours meanwhile a senior
un official has accused both sides of
committing war crimes he's our Middle
East correspondent y your land nail with
the latest
Israel's vast military might on display
once again it says Hamas has lost
control in Northern Gaza and its troops
are battling inside Gaza City this is a
critical point in the
war and for the first time the BBC was
given access behind Israeli lines in
Gaza escorted by soldiers while the BBC
had editorial control of the report
these pictures were cleared for use by
the Israeli military
amid the huge destruction officers
showed what they said was a Hamas
weapons factory set up they said below a
family apartment a child's bedroom they
insisted that Hamas not Israel was
responsible for civilian loss of life we
know intelligence we know what we hit we
know the targets they're
approved by the by our Command it's not
that I wake up and my my objective is to
to ruin the the city
I aim for enemy an enemy
only Israel says its actions in Gaza
where it's trying to eradicate Hamas are
a military necessity that this war is
about
self-defense but Air's view is
different she says that because of
Israel's bombardment nowhere is safe
there's no food or drinking water for
the children and that Israel has bombed
the
bakeries
Israel says that 50,000 Palestinians
moved South in Gaza yesterday when it
promised safe
passage but during the day deadly
Israeli air strikes were reported across
the length of the strip the Hamas run
authorities now say that more than 10
and a half thousand people have been
killed the UN Secretary General says the
civilian death toll in Gaza shows
something is clearly wrong with Israeli
military operations but also Al that
Hamas is using people as human Shields
meanwhile the un's human rights
commissioner visiting the region is
accusing both Israel and Hamas of war
crimes after G7 top diplomats voiced
their concerns at a meeting in Japan
attention is also beginning to turn to
the post-war future the US Secretary of
State Anthony blinkin said there should
be a United Palestinian L government for
Gaza and the West Bank as a step towards
Palestinian
statehood uh it's also clear that Israel
cannot occupy Gaza um now the reality is
that there may be uh a need for some
transition period uh at the end of the
conflict but it is imperative that um
the Palestinian people uh be Central to
uh to governance uh in uh in Gaza and in
the West Bank as
well but for now this conflict rages on
Hamas be hugely outgunned but its
Guerilla tactics on the streets of Gaza
could keep the war with Israel going for
months to
come yoland Nell BBC News
Jerusalem well more on this the French
government is hosting a conference in
Paris to discuss ways of getting
humanitarian Aid to people in Gaza
delegations from several Arab nations
are attending but Israel will not be
represented and its main backer the
United States is only sending a lowlevel
team well let's go live now to Paris and
our correspondent Hugh scoffield Hugh
let's just start with the conference
itself what is France hoping to
achieve well it's hoping that this will
lead to some kind of breakthrough in
getting Aid into Gaza um they're
assembling some very iminent people you
know the head of unra the relief agency
is going to be talking um um the head of
the International Red Cross will be here
briefing delegates on the situation um
and the hope is that they with the
delegations will come up with creative
ideas about getting Aid in about
establishing establishing field
hospitals uh getting fuel down into the
Gaza Strip and so on I have to say
there's a huge degree of skepticism
though about about this uh conference
which was hastily organized um in the
last few days and and it's really just a
kind of adjunct to an existing peace
Forum which president macron um had been
planning which will discuss a lot of
other issues such as global warming and
uh uh um Ai and so on and this was sort
of tacked on to the beginning because of
the pressing problem of Gaza but I don't
think there's a huge expectation that
it's going to lead to anything par
particularly significant but it does
send perhaps a message to Israel and
Israel isn't sending a delegation to the
conference and the French government has
talked about not wanting to offend the
Israeli
government yeah we need to be quite
clear that the Israelis are not sending
dation but primarily because they
weren't invited and that's not intended
to snub the Israelis the the idea was
that this would be a a conference of
countries that are interested in getting
Aid into to uh Gaza donor countries and
Israel obviously does not count among
them so um there's no intention of snubs
in either direction um but what is the
case I think is that this does have a PO
itical Dimension um the French
government President Ma in particular
has been accused by some here in France
many here in France of adopting a kind
of Nee pro-israeli um reaction and of uh
in the initial aftermath of the October
the 7th attacks you know coming down
very very very too firmly on behalf on
the side of of Israel and all of this
and there is pressure certainly from the
foreign ministry here to redress the
balance some somewhat and show that you
know France also shares the concerns of
the Arab world of the South um more
largely um and their concerns about
humanitarian difficulties in Gaza so
that does address that and does send out
a message and does send out a message
about how the world increasingly is
hoping for some kind of humanitarian
pause in the fighting yes thank you very
much that's our correspondent in Paris
Hugh scoffield well as Hugh mentioned
there there has been some skepticism
about the conference including from Aid
organizations and human rights groups
and we can now talk to Sasha deshmuk
who's the chief executive of Amnesty
International UK here in London Sasha
thank you very much for joining us so
Amnesty International has issued a
statement ahead of this conference
saying the focus should be on calling
for a
ceasefire yes we've welcomed the
International Community focusing on the
humanitarian situation in Gaza at this
conference we have said that a ceasefire
we believe is an important step that can
mean that there can be a chance for the
delivery of sustained and effective Aid
in Gaza there can be a chance for the
burying of the Dead there can be a
chance for the treatment of the many
many people wounded and also critically
during a ceasefire there can be an
intensification of
negotiations trying to ensure the return
of hostages which of course must also be
a critical Focus but do you understand
Israel's position because you've been
calling for a ceasefire but the Israeli
government says any pause in fighting
would benefit Hamas and it has a
responsibility to protect its
citizens well all states have a
responsibility to self-defense um of
their citizens they actually have that
as a duty but that Duty can never be
undertaken by committing War crime and
as you've reported um many experts
including the United Nations
commissioner have spoken now about war
crimes that have been conducted both by
Hamas but also by the Israeli
authorities I believe that a ceasefire
is critical in this situation um I
believe that it does provide would
provide an opportunity not only for the
delivery of critical humanitarian Aid in
a sustained way but also provide a
critical opportunity for a focus on the
hostages as well of course that hostage
taking is a terrible crime as well many
people watching might be wondering what
happens next because the United States
most countries are either calling for a
ceasefire or a pause in fighting what
can what more can be
done well I think within a ceasefire as
well as the delivery of humanitarian Aid
as well as a focus on the return of the
hostages critically also there needs to
be a focus on human rights and the
journey to a longer term solution which
I believe needs to be based on human
rights within a ceasefire we also need
to see um investigators from the United
Nations uh commission for human rights
from organizations such as Amnesty
International as well as the
international criminal court be allowed
access be allowed to actually give the
world truth about what has been
happening the crimes committed by both
sides but critically also what does it
then mean for there to be a human rights
solution a human rights based Journey
out of this conflict I believe it's only
with a focus on human rights that we're
going to see the end of what has been a
decades long crisis and also focusing
particularly on Gaza we need to remember
that the current situation which within
which we're calling for a ceasefire is
also been an intensification of a
16-year long blockade of Gaza that
action in and of itself is been an
illegal action thank you very much
that's Sasha deshmuk chief executive of
Amnesty International UK thanks for
joining us well for the latest on the
conflict let's go live now to our
correspondent Mark Len who's in southern
Israel and Mark as we've been reporting
there were about 50,000 people who left
Northern Gaza yesterday and the Israeli
military saying it's going to open a key
highway for people to leave once again
today what do we know about the movement
of people and how they're managing to
get out of Northern
Gaza well there is this Main Highway as
you say Katherine the salalen road which
which goes from the northern tip of Gaza
down uh down to the South and that is
the road that the Israelis are trying to
encourage civilians to take in order to
flee the most intense uh military uh air
strikes in the north of Gaza and the
Israeli Defense Forces say that 50,000
took that road yesterday that is
considered higher numbers than have
taken it if if confirmed uh the the
previous days um and the Israeli Defense
Force say that they it could indeed be
reopened again today there's been no
official confirmation but the likelihood
is that it would be reopened as the
Israelis try to get the civilians to
flee South but remember there are still
tens of thousands maybe even hundreds of
thousands who are still in the north uh
as the Israeli Defense Forces push
further into Gaza City now um the
Israelis say that Hamas has lost control
of Northern Gaza uh there was they say
an intense 10-hour battle yesterday to
take control of a Hamas stronghold um
and the offensive in into Gaza City
pushes deeper meanwhile there is some um
possible good news on on on the on the
hostages uh with the um with reports
that the Qatari government is mediating
for the release potentially of 12
hostages including some Americans uh the
Americans believe that 10 US Nationals
are still being held under Hamas
captivity uh and we understand that
those talks are ongoing and Mark we've
been talking so far in the program about
a possible ceasefire or pause in the
fighting the United States other allies
other isra other other allies of Israel
are calling for the same are we seeing
any sign of that from the government
there well certainly not a ceasefire
that the the Benjamin Netanyahu is ruled
out if unless there is a full release of
the hostages and that's very un likely
to happen what we're talking about
really is humanitarian pauses and pauses
in the fighting and yesterday the
Israeli military announced for the first
time that there would be a 4-Hour pause
in three large neighborhoods of Gaza
City uh in order for food and water to
be um to be reached by the civilians uh
but residents there saying that there is
such a shortage of food and water that
they were unable to get very much during
those those pauses but that was the
first time that there had been
apparently an official announcement from
inside Gaza City um meanwhile uh the you
what what what appears to be happening
are kind of more localized stoppages uh
in in in some isolated places on the
ground I don't think we're necessarily
going to get an official announcement
from the Israeli government about a
humanitarian pause I think it's going to
be more localized stoppages for people
to be able to access Aid uh so far um uh
yesterday we are told that 86 trucks uh
crossed from Rafa in Egypt into Gaza
carrying aid but that is still just a
drop in the ocean in terms of the needs
on the ground thank you very much that's
our correspondent there in southern
Israel Mark
Lauren